It is clear that the nutritional state of patients with inflammatory bowel disease is often impaired and can be improved by the provision of nutritional support. Improvement in nutritional status can be achieved as effectively with enteral as with parenteral nutrition. Nutritional support appears to have no primary therapeutic effect in patients with ulcerative colitis. With regard to nutritional support in Crohn's disease, parenteral nutrition should be restricted to use as supportive rather than primary therapy. Available information now seems to suggest that most of the benefits of parenteral nutrition in Crohn's disease are related to an improvement in nutritional state rather than as primary therapy, and its use should be restricted to the treatment of specific complications of Crohn's disease, such as intestinal obstruction related to stricture formation or short bowel syndrome following repeated resection. Although some doubt exists over the efficacy of oligopeptide-containing elemental and polymeric enteral diets, the present evidence indicates that chemically defined free amino acid-containing elemental diets have primary therapeutic efficacy in the management of acute exacerbations of Crohn's disease. As such, these diets are worthy of therapeutic trial in patients with severe Crohn's disease involving the distal colon and rectum, particularly in those patients who are malnourished and who prove to be resistant to treatment with a combination of topical corticosteroids and 5-aminosalicylic acid-containing compounds. Clinicians should be aware, though, that the beneficial effects are likely to be restricted to the short term, with high relapse rates by 1 year, this being particularly so in patients with distal Crohn's proctocolitis (Teahon et al, 1988). Volatile fatty acid enemas clearly have potential in the management of patients with severe steroid-resistant proctitis. Finally, one of the most important observations made in recent years is the one concerning the large losses of nitrogen that will occur in patients with inflammatory bowel disease treated with corticosteroids in the absence of adequate protein intake (O'Keefe et al, 1989). Hopefully the days of treating patients with severe inflammatory bowel disease with high dose corticosteroids and a peripheral dextrose or dextrose-saline drip have passed into history.